The Bhagavad-Gita — Discourse 1


					Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa





1922





Exported from Wikisource on February 13, 2023





ॐ

Aum.



THE BHAGAVAD-GITA

THE LORD'S SONG.

FIRST DISCOURSE.





धृतराष्ट्र उवाच ।



धर्मक्षेत्रे कुरुक्षेत्रे समवेता युयुत्सवः ।

मामकाः पाण्डवाश्चैव किमकुर्वत सञ्जय ॥ १ ॥





Dhritarâshtra said:



On the holy plain, on the field of Kuru,[1] gathered together, eager for battle, what did they, O Sanjaya, my people and the Pândavas? (1)



सञ्जय उवाच ।



दृष्ट्वा तु पाण्डवानीकं व्यूढं दुर्योधनस्तदा ।

आचार्यमुपसङ्गम्य राजा वचनमब्रवीत् ॥ २ ॥





Sanjaya said:



Having seen arrayed the army of the Pândavas, the Prince Duryodhana approached his teacher,[2] and spake these words: (2)



पश्यैतां पाण्डुपुत्राणामाचार्य महतीं चमूम् । व्यूढां द्रुपदपुत्रेण तव शिष्येण धीमता ॥ ३ ॥





"Behold this mighty host of the sons of Pându, O teacher, arrayed by the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple. (3)



अत्र शूरा महेष्वासा भीमार्जुनसमा युधि । युयुधानो विराटश्च द्रुपदश्च महारथः ॥ ४ ॥





Heroes are these, mighty bowmen, to Bhîma and Arjuna equal in battle: Yuyudhâna, Virâta, and Drupada of the great car.[3](4)



धृष्टकेतुश्चेकितानः काशिराजश्च वीर्यवान् । पुरुजित्कुन्तिभोजश्च शैब्यश्च नरपुङ्गवः ॥ ५ ॥





Drishtaketu, Chekitâna and the valiant King of Kâshi, Purujit and Kuntibhoja, and Shaivya, bull[4] among men; (5)



युधामन्युश्च विक्रान्त उत्तमौजाश्च वीर्यवान् । सौभद्रो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्व एव महारथाः ॥ ६ ॥





Yudhâmanyu the strong, and Uttamaujas the brave; Saubhadra[5] and the Draupadeyas,[6] all of great cars. (6)



अस्माकं तु विशिष्टा ये तान्निबोध द्विजोत्तम । नायका मम सैन्यस्य संज्ञार्थं तान्ब्रवीमि ते ॥ ७ ॥





Know further all those who are our chiefs, O best of the twice-born, the leaders of my army; these I name to thee for thy information: (7)



भवान्भीष्मश्च कर्णश्च कृपश्च समितिञ्जयः । अश्वत्थामा विकर्णश्च सौमदत्तिस्तथैव च ॥ ८ ॥





Thou, Lord, and Bhîshma, and Karna and Kripa, conquering in battle; Ashvatthâmâ, Vikarna, and Saumadatti[7] also; (8)



अन्ये च बहवः शूरा मदर्थे त्यक्तजीविताः । नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणाः सर्वे युद्धविशारदाः ॥ ९ ॥





And many others, heroes, for my sake renouncing their lives, with divers weapons and missiles, and all well-skilled in war. (9)



अपर्याप्तं तदस्माकं बलं भीष्माभिरक्षितम् । पर्याप्तं त्विदमेतेषां बलं भीमाभिरक्षितम् ॥ १० ॥





Yet insufficient seems this army of ours, though marshalled by Bhîshma, while that army of theirs seems sufficient, though marshalled by Bhîma;[8](10)



अयनेषु च सर्वेषु यथाभागमवस्थिताः । भीष्ममेवाभिरक्षन्तु भवन्तः सर्व एव हि ॥ ॥ ११ ॥





Therefore in the rank and file let all, standing firmly in their respective divisions, guard Bhîshma, even all ye generals. (11)



तस्य सञ्जनयन्हर्षं कुरुवृद्धः पितामहः । सिंहनादं विनद्योच्चैः शङ्खं दध्मौ प्रतापवान् ॥ १२ ॥





To enhearten him, the Ancient of the Kurus, the Grandsire,[9] the glorious, blew his conch, sounding on high a lion's roar. (12)



ततः शङ्खाश्च भेर्यश्च पणवानकगोमुखाः । सहसैवाभ्यहन्यन्त स शब्दस्तुमुलोऽभवत् ॥ १३ ॥





Then conches and kettledrums, tabors and drums and cowhorns, suddenly blared forth, and the sound was tumultuous. (13)



ततः श्वेतैर्हयैर्युक्ते महति स्यन्दने स्थितौ । माधवः पाण्डवश्चैव दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतुः ॥ १४ ॥





Then, stationed in their great war-chariot, yoked to white horses, Mâdhava[10] and the son of Pându[11] blew their divine conches. (14)



पाञ्चजन्यं हृषीकेशो देवदत्तं धनञ्जयः । पौण्ड्रं दध्मौ महाशङ्खं भीमकर्मा वृकोदरः ॥ १५ ॥





Pânchajanya by Hrishîkesha, and Devadatta by Dhananjaya.[12] Vrikodara[13] of terrible deeds blew his mighty conch, Paundra; (15)



अनन्तविजयं राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः । नकुलः सहदेवश्च सुघोषमणिपुष्पकौ ॥ १६ ॥





The King Yudhishthira, the son of Kuntî, blew Anantavijaya; Nakula and Sahadeva, Sughosha and Manipushpaka.[14](16)



काश्यश्च परमेष्वासः शिखण्डी च महारथः । धृष्टद्युम्नो विराटश्च सात्यकिश्चापराजितः ॥ १७ ॥





And Kâshya,[15] of the great bow and Shikhandî, the mighty car-warrior, Drishtadyumna and Virâta and Sâtyaki, the unconquered. (17)



द्रुपदो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्वशः पृथिवीपते । सौभद्रश्च महाबाहुः शङ्खान्दध्मुः पृथक्पृथक् ॥ १८ ॥





Drupada and the Draupadeyas, O Lord of earth, and Saubhadra, the mighty-armed, on all sides their several conches blew. (18)



स घोषो धार्तराष्ट्राणां हृदयानि व्यदारयत् । नभश्च पृथिवीं चैव तुमुलो व्यनुनादयन् ॥ १९ ॥





That tumultuous uproar rent the hearts of the sons of Dhritarâshtra, filling the earth and sky with sound. (19)



अथ व्यवस्थितान्दृष्ट्वा धार्तराष्ट्रान्कपिध्वजः । प्रवृत्ते शस्त्रसम्पाते धनुरुद्यम्य पाण्डवः ॥ २० ॥





Then, beholding the sons of Dhritarâshtra standing arrayed, and flight of missiles about to begin, he whose crest is an ape, the son of Pându, took up his bow, (20)



हृषीकेशं तदा वाक्यमिदमाह महीपते । अर्जुन उवाच ।



सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये रथं स्थापय मेऽच्युत ॥ २१ ॥





And spake this word to Hrishîkesha, O Lord of Earth:

Arjuna said:



In the midst, between the two armies, stay my chariot, O Achyuta,[16](21)



यावदेतान्निरीक्षेऽहं योद्‌धुकामानवस्थितान् । कैर्मया सह योद्धव्यमस्मिन्रणसमुद्यमे ॥ २२ ॥





That I may behold these standing, longing for battle, with whom I must strive in this outbreaking war, (22)



योत्स्यमानानवेक्षेऽहं य एतेऽत्र समागताः । धार्तराष्ट्रस्य दुर्बुद्धेर्युद्धे प्रियचिकीर्षवः ॥ २३ ॥





And gaze on those here gathered together ready to fight, desirous of pleasing in battle the evil-minded son of Dhritarâshtra. (23)



सञ्जय उवाच ।



एवमुक्तो हृषीकेशो गुडाकेशेन भारत ।

सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये स्थापयित्वा रथोत्तमम् ॥ २४ ॥





Sanjaya said:



Thus addressed by Gudâkesha,[17] Hrishîkesha, O Bhârata, having stayed that best of chariots in the midst, between the two armies, (24)



भीष्मद्रोणप्रमुखतः सर्वेषां च महीक्षिताम् । उवाच पार्थ पश्यैतान्समवेतान्कुरूनिति ॥ २५ ॥





Over against Bhîshma, Drona and all the rulers of the world, said: "O Pârtha, behold these Kurus gathered together." (25)



तत्रापश्यत्स्थितान्पार्थः पितॄनथ पितामहान् । आचार्यान्मातुलान्भ्रातॄन्पुत्रान्पौत्रान्सखींस्तथा ॥ २६ ॥





Then saw Pârtha standing there, uncles and grandfathers, teachers, mother's brothers, cousins, sons and grandsons, comrades, (26)



श्वशुरान्सुहृदश्चैव सेनयोरुभयोरपि । तान्समीक्ष्य स कौन्तेयः सर्वान्बन्धूनवस्थितान् ॥ २७ ॥





Fathers-in-law and benefactors also in both armies; seeing all these kinsmen thus standing arrayed, Kaunteya,[18](27)



कृपया परयाऽऽविष्टो विषीदन्निदमब्रवीत् ।



अर्जुन उवाच ।



दृष्ट्वेमं स्वजनं कृष्ण युयुत्सुं समुपस्थितम् ॥ २८ ॥





Deeply moved to pity, thus uttered in sadness:

Arjuna said:



Seeing these my kinsmen, O Krishna, arrayed, eager to fight, (28)



सीदन्ति मम गात्राणि मुखं च परिशुष्यति । वेपथुश्च शरीरे मे रोमहर्षश्च जायते ॥ २९ ॥





My limbs fail and my mouth is parched, my body quivers, and my hair stands on end, (29)



गाण्डीवं स्रंसते हस्तात्त्वक्चैव परिदह्यते । न च शक्नोम्यवस्थातुं भ्रमतीव च मे मनः ॥ ३० ॥





Gândîva slips from my hand, and my skin burns all over, I am not able to stand, my mind is whirling, (30)



निमित्तानि च पश्यामि विपरीतानि केशव । न च श्रेयोऽनुपश्यामि हत्वा स्वजनमाहवे ॥ ३१ ॥





And I see adverse omens, O Keshava.[19] Nor do I foresee any advantage from slaying kinsmen in battle. (31)



न काङ्क्षे विजयं कृष्ण न च राज्यं सुखानि च । किं नो राज्येन गोविन्द किं भोगैर्जीवितेन वा ॥ ३२ ॥





For I desire not victory, O Krishna, nor kingdom, nor pleasures; what is kingdom to us, O Govinda, what enjoyment or even life? (32)



येषामर्थे काङ्क्षितं नो राज्यं भोगाः सुखानि च । त इमेऽवस्थिता युद्धे प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा धनानि च ॥ ३३ ॥





Those for whose sake we desire kingdom, enjoyments and pleasures, they stand here in battle, abandoning life and riches— (33)



आचार्याः पितरः पुत्रास्तथैव च पितामहाः । मातुलाः श्वशुराः पौत्राः श्यालाः सम्बन्धिनस्तथा ॥ ३४ ॥





Teachers, fathers, sons, as well as grandfathers, mother's brothers, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives. (34)



एतान्न हन्तुमिच्छामि घ्नतोऽपि मधुसूदन । अपि त्रैलोक्यराज्यस्य हेतोः किं नु महीकृते ॥ ३५ ॥





These I do not wish to kill, though myself slain, O Madhusûdana,[20] even for the sake of the kingship of the three worlds; how then for earth? (35)



निहत्य धार्तराष्ट्रान्नः का प्रीतिः स्याज्जनार्दन । पापमेवाश्रयेदस्मान्हत्वैतानाततायिनः ॥ ३६ ॥





Slaying these sons of Dhritarâshtra, what pleasure can be ours, O Janârdana?[21] Killing these desperadoes, sin will but take hold of us. (36)



तस्मान्नार्हा वयं हन्तुं धार्तराष्ट्रान्स्वबान्धवान् । स्वजनं हि कथं हत्वा सुखिनः स्याम माधव ॥ ३७ ॥





Therefore we should not kill the sons of Dhritarâshtra, our relatives; for how, killing our kinsmen, may we be happy, O Mâdhava? (37)



यद्यप्येते न पश्यन्ति लोभोपहतचेतसः । कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं मित्रद्रोहे च पातकम् ॥ ३८ ॥





Although these, with intelligence overpowered by greed, see no guilt in the destruction of a family, no crime in hostility to friends, (38)



कथं न ज्ञेयमस्माभिः पापादस्मान्निवर्तितुम् । कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं प्रपश्यद्भिर्जनार्दन ॥ ३९ ॥





Why should not we learn to turn away from such a sin, O Janârdana, who see the evils in the destruction of a family? (39)



कुलक्षये प्रणश्यन्ति कुलधर्माः सनातनाः । धर्मे नष्टे कुलं कृत्स्नमधर्मोऽभिभवत्युत ॥ ४० ॥





In the destruction of a family the immemorial family traditions[22] perish; in the perishing of tradition, lawlessness overcomes the whole family; (40)



अधर्माभिभवात्कृष्ण प्रदुष्यन्ति कुलस्त्रियः । स्त्रीषु दुष्टासु वार्ष्णेय जायते वर्णसङ्करः ॥ ४१ ॥





Owing to predominance of lawlessness, O Krishna, the women of the family become corrupt; women corrupted, O Vârshneya,[23] there ariseth caste confusion; (41)



सङ्करो नरकायैव कुलघ्नानां कुलस्य च । पतन्ति पितरो ह्येषां लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः ॥ ४२ ॥





This confusion draggeth to hell the slayers of the family, and the family; for their ancestors fall, deprived of rice-balls and libations. (42)



दोषैरेतैः कुलघ्नानां वर्णसङ्करकारकैः । उत्साद्यन्ते जातिधर्माः कुलधर्माश्च शाश्वताः ॥ ४३ ॥





By these caste-confusing misdeeds of the slayers of the family, the everlasting caste customs[24] and family customs[24] are abolished. (43)



उत्सन्नकुलधर्माणां मनुष्याणां जनार्दन । नरके नियतं वासो भवतीत्यनुशुश्रुम ॥ ४४ ॥





The abode of the men whose family customs[24] are extinguished, O Janârdana, is everlastingly in hell. Thus have we heard. (44)



अहो बत महत्पापं कर्तुं व्यवसिता वयम् । यद्राज्यसुखलोभेन हन्तुं स्वजनमुद्यताः ॥ ४५ ॥





Alas! in committing a great sin are we engaged, we who are endeavouring to kill our kindred from greed of the pleasures of kingship. (45)



यदि मामप्रतीकारमशस्त्रं शस्त्रपाणयः । धार्तराष्ट्रा रणे हन्युस्तन्मे क्षेमतरं भवेत् ॥ ४६ ॥





If the sons of Dhritarâshtra, weapon in hand, should slay me, unresisting, unarmed, in the battle, that would for me be the better. (46)



सञ्जय उवाच ।



एवमुक्त्वाऽर्जुनः सङ्ख्ये रथोपस्थ उपाविशत् ।

विसृज्य सशरं चापं शोकसंविग्नमानसः ॥ ४७ ॥





Sanjaya said:



Having thus spoken on the battle-field, Arjuna sank down on the seat of the chariot, casting away his bow and arrow, his mind overborne by grief. (47)



इति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासूपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादेऽर्जुनविषादयोगो नाम

प्रथमोऽध्यायः ।





Thus in the glorious Upanishads of the Bhagavad-Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the first discourse, entitled:



THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA.





* * *





↑ The common ancestor of the contending parties, the Kurus and the Pândavas, in the impending battle.

↑ Drona, the son of Bharadvâja.

↑ One able to fight alone ten thousand bowmen.

↑ The bull, as the emblem of manly strength and vigour, is often used as an epithet of honour.

↑ Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadrâ and Arjuna.

↑ The sons and grandsons of Drupada.

↑ The son of Somadatta.

↑ The commentators differ in their interpretation of this verse; Anandagiri takes it to mean just the reverse of Shridhara Svâmi, "aparyâptam" being taken by the one as "insufficient," by the other as "unlimited."

↑ Bhishma.

↑ Shri Krishna.

↑ Arjuna.

↑ Pânchajanya, Shri Krishna's conch, was made from the bones of the giant Panchajana, slain by him. The title Hrishîkesha is "Lord of the senses." Dhananjaya, the "conqueror of wealth," is a title often given to Arjuna, whose conch is the "God-given."

↑ Bhîma; the meaning of the name of his conch is doubtful.

↑ The conches of the remaining three brothers were named respectively "endless victory," "honey-tone," and "jewel-blossom."

↑ The King of Kâshi, the modern Benares.

↑ The changeless, the immovable.

↑ The lord of sleep, Arjuna.

↑ The son of Kuntî, Arjuna.

↑ "He who has luxurious hair," or, "He who sleeps on the waters."

↑ The slayer of Madhu, a demon.

↑ "Destroyer of the people." Shri Krishna as the warrior conquering all forms of evil.

↑ Dharma; this is a wide word, primarily meaning the essential nature of a thing, that which makes it to be what it is externally: hence, the laws of its being, its duty: and it includes religious rites, appropriate to those laws, customs, also righteousness.

↑ Belonging to the family of Vrishni.

↑ 24.024.124.2 Dharma.





* * *





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource[1]. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported[2] license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL[3].

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page[4].

The following users contributed to this book:

[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]



* * *



↑ https://en.wikisource.org

↑ https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0

↑ https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

↑ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium





