The Bhagavad-Gita — Discourse 13


					Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa





Exported from Wikisource on February 14, 2023





THIRTEENTH DISCOURSE.



अर्जुन उवाच ।



प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव क्षेत्रं क्षेत्रज्ञमेव च ।

एतद्वेदितुमिच्छामि ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं च केशव ॥ १ ॥





Arjuna said:



Matter and Spirit,[1] even the Field and the Knower of the Field, wisdom and that which ought to be known, these I fain would learn, O Keshava. (1)



श्रीभगवानुवाच ।



इदं शरीरं कौन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते ।

एतद्यो वेत्ति तं प्राहुः क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विदः ॥ २ ॥





The Blessed Lord said:



This body, son of Kuntî, is called the Field; that which knoweth it is called the Knower of the Field by the Sages. (2)



क्षेत्रज्ञं चापि मां विद्धि सर्वक्षेत्रेषु भारत । क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोर्ज्ञानं यत्तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम ॥ ३ ॥





Understand Me as the Knower of the Field in all Fields, O Bhârata. Wisdom as to the Field and the Knower of the Field, that in My opinion is the wisdom. (3)



तत्क्षेत्रं यच्च यादृक् च यद्विकारि यतश्च यत् । स च यो यत्प्रभावश्च तत्समासेन मे शृणु ॥ ४ ॥





What that Field is and of what nature, how modified, and whence it is, and what He[2] is and what His powers, hear that now briefly from Me. (4)



ऋषिभिर्बहुधा गीतं छन्दोभिर्विविधैः पृथक् । ब्रह्मसूत्रपदैश्चैव हेतुमद्भिर्विनिश्चितैः ॥ ५ ॥





Rishis have sung in manifold ways, in many various chants, and in decisive Brahma-sûtra verses[3] full of reasonings. (5)



महाभूतान्यहङ्कारो बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च । इन्द्रियाणि दशैकं च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचराः ॥ ६ ॥





The great Elements, Individuality[4], Reason[5], and also the unmanifested, the ten senses and the one, and the five pastures of the senses[6]; (6)



इच्छा द्वेषः सुखं दुःखं सङ्घातश्चेतना धृतिः । एतत्क्षेत्रं समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम् ॥ ७ ॥





Desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, combination[7], intelligence, firmness; these, briefly described, constitute the Field and its modifications. (7)



अमानित्वमदम्भित्वमहिंसा क्षान्तिरार्जवम् । आचार्योपासनं शौचं स्थैर्यमात्मविनिग्रहः ॥ ८ ॥





Humility, unpretentiousness, harmlessness, forgiveness, rectitude, service of the teacher, purity, steadfastness, self-control. (8)



इन्द्रियार्थेषु वैराग्यमनहङ्कार एव च । जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिदुःखदोषानुदर्शनम् ॥ ९ ॥





Dispassion towards the objects of the senses, and also absence of egoism, insight into the pain and evil of birth, death, old age and sickness, (9)



असक्तिरनभिष्वङ्गः पुत्रदारगृहादिषु । नित्यं च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु ॥ १० ॥





Unattachment, absence of self-identification with son, wife or home, and constant balance of mind in wished-for and unwished-for events, (10)



मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी । विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिर्जनसंसदि ॥ ११ ॥





Unflinching devotion to Me by yoga, without other objects, resort to sequestered places, absence of enjoyment in the company of men, (11)



अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्त्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम् । एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा ॥ १२ ॥





Constancy in the wisdom of the Self,[8] understanding of the object of essential wisdom; that is declared to be the Wisdom; all against it is ignorance. (12)



ज्ञेयं यत्तत्प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वाऽमृतमश्नुते । अनादिमत्परं ब्रह्म न सत्तन्नासदुच्यते ॥ १३ ॥





I will declare that which ought to be known, that which being known immortality is enjoyed—the beginningless supreme Eternal, called neither being nor non-being. (13)



सर्वतः पाणिपादं तत्सर्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम् । सर्वतः श्रुतिमल्लोके सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति ॥ १४ ॥





Everywhere That hath hands and feet, everywhere eyes, heads, and mouths; all-hearing, He dwelleth in the world, enveloping all, (14)



सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं सर्वेन्द्रियविवर्जितम् । असक्तं सर्वभृच्चैव निर्गुणं गुणभोक्तृ च ॥ १५ ॥





Shining with all sense-faculties without any senses; unattached supporting everything and free from qualities[9] enjoying qualities;[9](15)



बहिरन्तश्च भूतानामचरं चरमेव च । सूक्ष्मत्वात्तदविज्ञेयं दूरस्थं चान्तिके च तत् ॥ १६ ॥





Without and within all beings, immovable and also movable; by reason of His subtlety imperceptible; at hand and far away is That. (16)



अविभक्तं च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम् । भूतभर्तृ च तज्ज्ञेयं ग्रसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च ॥ १७ ॥





Not divided amid beings, and yet seated distributively; that is to be known as the supporter of beings; He devours and He generates. (17)



ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमसः परमुच्यते । ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्वस्य धिष्ठितम् ॥ १८ ॥





That, the Light of all lights, is said to be beyond darkness; Wisdom, the Object of Wisdom, by Wisdom to be reached, seated in the hearts of all. (18)



इति क्षेत्रं तथा ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं चोक्तं समासतः । मद्भक्त एतद्विज्ञाय मद्भावायोपपद्यते ॥ १९ ॥





Thus the Field, Wisdom and the Object of Wisdom, have been briefly told. My devotee, thus knowing, enters into My Being. (19)



प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव विद्ध्यनादी उभावपि । विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रकृतिसंभवान् ॥ २० ॥





Know thou that Matter[10] and Spirit[11] are both without beginning; and know thou also that modifications and qualities[12] are all Matter[10]-born. (20)



कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे हेतुः प्रकृतिरुच्यते । पुरुषः सुखदुःखानां भोक्तृत्वे हेतुरुच्यते ॥ २१ ॥





Matter[10] is called the cause of the generation of causes and effects; Spirit[11] is called the cause of the enjoyment of pleasure and pain. (21)



पुरुषः प्रकृतिस्थो हि भुङ्‌क्ते प्रकृतिजान्गुणान् । कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु ॥ २२ ॥





Spirit[11] seated in Matter[10] useth the qualities born of Matter[10]; attachment to the qualities[12] is the cause of his births in good and evil wombs. (22)



उपद्रष्टाऽनुमन्ता च भर्ता भोक्ता महेश्वरः । परमात्मेति चाप्युक्तो देहेऽस्मिन्पुरुषः परः ॥ २३ ॥





Supervisor and permitter, supporter, enjoyer, the great Lord, and also the supreme Self; thus is styled in this body the supreme Spirit.[10] (23)



य एवं वेत्ति पुरुषं प्रकृतिं च गुणैः सह । सर्वथा वर्तमानोऽपि न स भूयोऽभिजायते ॥ २४ ॥





He who thus knoweth Spirit[11] and Matter[10] with its qualities,[12] in whatsoever condition he may be, he shall not be born again. (24)



ध्यानेनात्मनि पश्यन्ति केचिदात्मानमात्मना । अन्ये साङ्ख्येन योगेन कर्मयोगेन चापरे ॥ २५ ॥





Some by meditation behold the Self in the self by the Self; others by the Sânkhya Yoga, and others by the Yoga of Action; (25)



अन्ये त्वेवमजानन्तः श्रुत्वाऽन्येभ्य उपासते । तेऽपि चातितरन्त्येव मृत्युं श्रुतिपरायणाः ॥ २६ ॥





Others also, ignorant of this, having heard of it from others, worship; and these also cross beyond death, adhering to what they had heard. (26)



यावत्सञ्जायते किञ्चित्सत्त्वं स्थावरजङ्गमम् । क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात्तद्विद्धि भरतर्षभ ॥ २७ ॥





Whatsoever creature is born immobile or mobile, know thou, O best of the Bhâratas, that it is from the union between the Field and the Knower of the Field. (27)



समं सर्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम् । विनश्यत्स्वविनश्यन्तं यः पश्यति स पश्यति ॥ २८ ॥





Seated equally in all beings, the supreme Lord, unperishing within the perishing—he who thus seeth, he seeth. (28)



समं पश्यन्हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम् । न हिनस्त्यात्मनाऽऽत्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥ २९ ॥





Seeing indeed everywhere the same Lord equally dwelling, he doth not destroy the Self, and thus treads the highest Path. (29)



प्रकृत्यैव च कर्माणि क्रियमाणानि सर्वशः । यः पश्यति तथाऽऽत्मानमकर्तारं स पश्यति ॥ ३० ॥





He who seeth that Matter[10] verily performeth all actions, and that the Self is actionless, he seeth. (30)



यदा भूतपृथग्भावमेकस्थमनुपश्यति । तत एव च विस्तारं ब्रह्म संपद्यते तदा ॥ ३१ ॥





When he perceiveth the diversified existence of beings as rooted in One, and spreading forth from it, then he reacheth the Eternal (31)



अनादित्वान्निर्गुणत्वात्परमात्माऽयमव्ययः । शरीरस्थोऽपि कौन्तेय न करोति न लिप्यते ॥ ३२ ॥





Being beginningless and without qualities[12], the imperishable supreme Self, though seated in the body, O Kaunteya, worketh not nor is affected. (32)



यथा सर्वगतं सौक्ष्म्यादाकाशं नोपलिप्यते । सर्वत्रावस्थितो देहे तथाऽऽमा नोपलिप्यते ॥ ३३ ॥





As the omnipresent ether is not affected, by reason of its subtlety, so seated everywhere in the body the Self is not affected. (33)



यथा प्रकाशयत्येकः कृत्स्नं लोकमिमं रविः । क्षेत्रं क्षेत्री तथा कृत्स्नं प्रकाशयति भारत ॥ ३४ ॥





As the one sun illumineth the whole earth, so the Lord of the Field illumineth the whole Field, O Bhârata. (34)



क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोरेवमन्तरं ज्ञानचक्षुषा । भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षं च ये विदुर्यान्ति ते परम् ॥ ३५ ॥





They who by the eyes of Wisdom perceive this difference between the Field and the Knower of the Field, and the liberation of beings from Matter[13] they go to the Supreme. (35)



इति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीता॰ क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञविभागयोगो नाम त्रयोदशोऽध्यायः ।





Thus in the glorious Upanishads of the Bhagavad-Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Shrî Krishna and Arjuna, the thirteenth discourse entitled:



THE YOGA OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE FIELD AND THE KNOWER OF THE FIELD.





* * *





↑ Prakriti and Purusha.

↑ Kshetrajña, the Knower of the Field.

↑ Short terse sayings, concerning the Eternal.

↑ Ahañkara

↑ Buddhi.

↑ The five organs of knowledge, or senses, the five organs of action, the mind, and the object cognised by each of the five senses.

↑ The body.

↑ Adhyâtma; see vii, 29.

↑ 9.09.1 Gunas.

↑ 10.010.110.210.310.410.510.610.7 Prakriti.

↑ 11.011.111.211.311.4 Purusha.

↑ 12.012.112.212.3 Gunas.

↑ Prakriti





* * *





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource[1]. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported[2] license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL[3].

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page[4].

The following users contributed to this book:

[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]



* * *



↑ https://en.wikisource.org

↑ https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0

↑ https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

↑ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium





