The Bhagavad-Gita — Discourse 12


					Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa





Exported from Wikisource on February 14, 2023





TWELFTH DISCOURSE.



अर्जुन उवाच ।



एवं सततयुक्ता ये भक्तास्त्वां पर्युपासते ।

ये चाप्यक्षरमव्यक्तं तेषां के योगवित्तमाः ॥ १ ॥





Arjuna said:



Those devotees who ever harmonised worship Thee, and those also who worship the Indestructible, the Unmanifested, whether of these is the more learned in yoga? (1)



श्रीभगवानुवाच ।



मय्यावेश्य मनो ये मां नित्ययुक्ता उपासते ।

श्रद्धया परयोपेतास्ते मे युक्ततमा मताः ॥ २ ॥





The Blessed Lord said:



They who with mind[1] fixed on Me ever harmonised worship Me, with faith supreme endowed, these, in My opinion, are best in yoga. (2)



ये त्वक्षरमनिर्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्युपासते । सर्वत्रगमचिन्त्यं च कूटस्थमचलं ध्रुवम् ॥ ३ ॥





They who worship the Indestructible, the Ineffable, the unmanifested, Omnipresent, and Unthinkable, the Unchanging, Immutable, Eternal, (3)



संनियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं सर्वत्र समबुद्धयः । ते प्राप्नुवन्ति मामेव सर्वभूतहिते रताः ॥ ४ ॥





Restraining and subduing the senses, regarding everything equally, in the welfare of all rejoicing, these also come unto Me. (4)



क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् । अव्यक्ता हि गतिर्दुःखं देहवद्भिरवाप्यते ॥ ५ ॥





The difficulty of those whose minds are set on the Unmanifested is greater; for the path of the Unmanifested is hard for the embodied to reach. (5)



ये तु सर्वाणि कर्माणि मयि संन्यस्य मत्पराः । अनन्येनैव योगेन मां ध्यायन्त उपासते ॥ ६ ॥





Those verily who, renouncing all actions in Me and intent on Me, worship meditating on Me, with whole-hearted yoga, (6)



तेषामहं समुद्धर्ता मृत्युसंसारसागरात् । भवामि न चिरात्पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम् ॥ ७ ॥





These I speedily lift up from the ocean of death and existence, O Pârtha, their minds[2] being fixed on Me. (7)



मय्येव मन आधत्स्व मयि बुद्धिं निवेशय । निवसिष्यसि मय्येव अत ऊर्ध्वं न संशयः ॥ ८ ॥





Place thy mind[3] in me, into Me let thy Reason[4] enter; then without doubt thou shalt abide in Me hereafter. (8)



अथ चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि मयि स्थिरम् । अभ्यासयोगेन ततो मामिच्छाप्तुं धनञ्जय ॥ ९ ॥





And if thou art not able firmly to fix thy mind[5]on Me, then by the yoga of practice seek to reach Me, O Dhananjaya. (9)



अभ्यासेऽप्यसमर्थोऽसि मत्कर्मपरमो भव । मदर्थमपि कर्माणि कुर्वन्सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि ॥ १० ॥





If also thou art not equal to constant practice, be intent on My service; performing actions for My sake, thou shalt attain perfection. (10)



अथैतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कर्तुं मद्योगमाश्रितः । सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं ततः कुरु यतात्मवान् ॥ ११ ॥





If even to do this thou hast not strength, then, taking refuge in union with Me, renounce all fruit of action with the self controlled. (11)



श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद्ध्यानं विशिष्यते । ध्यानात्कर्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम् ॥ १२ ॥





Better indeed is wisdom than constant-practice; than wisdom, meditation is better; than meditation, renunciation of the fruit of action; on renunciation follows peace. (12)



अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च । निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ॥ १३ ॥





He who beareth no ill-will to any being, friendly and compassionate, without attachment and egoism, balanced in pleasure and pain, and forgiving, (13)



सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढनिश्चयः । मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्यो मे भक्तः स मे प्रियः ॥ १४ ॥





Ever content, harmonious, with the self-controlled, resolute, with mind[6] and Reason[7] dedicated to Me, he, My devotee, is dear to Me. (14)



यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च यः । हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः स च मे प्रियः ॥ १५ ॥





He from whom the world doth not shrink away, who doth not shrink away from the world, freed from the anxieties of joy, anger, and fear, he is dear to me. (15)



अनपेक्षः शुचिर्दक्ष उदासीनो गतव्यथः । सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ॥ १६ ॥





He who wants nothing, is pure, expert, passionless, untroubled, renouncing every undertaking, he, My devotee, is dear to Me. (16)



यो न हृष्यति न द्वेष्टि न शोचति न काङ्क्षति । शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रियः ॥ १७ ॥





He who neither loveth nor hateth, nor grieveth, nor desireth, renouncing good and evil, full of devotion, he is dear to Me. (17)



समः शत्रौ च मित्रे च तथा मानपमानयोः । शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु समः सङ्गविवर्जितः ॥ १८ ॥





Alike to foe and friend, and also in fame and ignominy, alike in cold and heat, pleasures and pains, destitute of attachment, (18)



तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिर्मौनी सन्तुष्टो येनकेनचित् । अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिर्भक्तिमान्मे प्रियो नरः ॥ १९ ॥





Taking equally praise and reproach, silent, wholly content with what cometh, homeless, firm in mind, full of devotion, that man is dear to Me. (19)



ये तु धर्म्यामृतमिदं यथोक्तं पर्युपासते । श्रद्दधाना मत्परमा भक्तास्तेऽतीव मे प्रियाः ॥ २० ॥





They verily who partake of this life-giving wisdom[8] as taught herein, endued with faith, I their supreme Object, devotees, they are surpassingly dear to Me. (20)



इति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीता॰ भक्तियोगो नाम द्वादशोऽध्यायः ।





Thus in the glorious Upanishads of the Bhagavad-Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the twelfth discourse, entitled:



THE YOGA OF DEVOTION.





* * *





↑ Manah.

↑ Chetah.

↑ Manah.

↑ Buddhi.

↑ Chitta.

↑ Manah.

↑ Buddhi.

↑ Amrita-Dharma.





* * *





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource[1]. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported[2] license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL[3].

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page[4].

The following users contributed to this book:

[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]



* * *



↑ https://en.wikisource.org

↑ https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0

↑ https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

↑ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium





