The Bhagavad-Gita — Discourse 10


					Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa





Exported from Wikisource on February 14, 2023





TENTH DISCOURSE.



श्रीभगवानुवाच ।



भूय एव महाबाहो शृणु मे परमं वचः ।

यत्तेऽहं प्रीयमाणाय वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया ॥ १ ॥





The Blessed Lord said:



Again, O mighty-armed, hear thou My supreme word, that, desiring thy welfare, I will declare to thee who art beloved. (1)



न मे विदुः सुरगणाः प्रभवं न महर्षयः । अहमादिर्हि देवानां महर्षीणां च सर्वशः ॥ २ ॥





The multitude of the Shining Ones, or the great Rishis,[1] know not my forthcoming, for I am the beginning of all the Shining Ones and the great Rishis. (2)



यो मामजमनादिं च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम् । असम्मूढः स मर्त्येषु सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते ॥ ३ ॥





He who knoweth Me, unborn, beginningless, the great Lord of the world, he among mortals without delusion, is liberated from all sin. (3)



बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोहः क्षमा सत्यं दमः शमः । सुखं दुःखं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च ॥ ४ ॥





Reason,[2] wisdom, non-illusion, forgiveness, truth, self-restraint, calmness, pleasure, pain, existence, non-existence, fear, and also courage (4)



अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयशः । भवन्ति भावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधाः ॥ ५ ॥





Harmlessness, equanimity, content, austerity, almsgiving, fame and obloquy are the various characteristics of beings issuing from Me. (5)



महर्षयः सप्त पूर्वे चत्वारो मनवस्तथा । मद्भावा मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमाः प्रजाः ॥ ६ ॥





The seven great Rishis, the ancient Four,[3] and also the Manus,[4] were born of My nature, and mind; of them this race was generated. (6)



एतां विभूतिं योगं च मम यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः । सोऽविकम्पेन योगेन युज्यते नात्र संशयः ॥ ७ ॥





He who knows in essence that sovereignty and yoga of Mine, he is harmonised by unfaltering yoga; there is no doubt thereof. (7)



अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते । इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विताः ॥ ८ ॥





I am the Generator of all; all evolves from Me; understanding thus, the wise adore Me in rapt emotion. (8)



मच्चित्ता मद्गतप्राणा बोधयन्तः परस्परम् । कथयन्तश्च मां नित्यं तुष्यन्ति च रमन्ति च ॥ ९ ॥





Mindful of Me, their life hidden in Me, illumining each other, ever conversing about Me, they are content and joyful. (9)



तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां प्रीतिपूर्वकम् । ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते ॥ १० ॥





To these, ever harmonious, worshipping in love, I give the yoga of discrimination[5] by which they come unto Me. (10)



तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजं तमः । नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भास्वता ॥ ११ ॥





Out of pure compassion for them, dwelling within their Self, I destroy the ignorance-born darkness by the shining lamp of wisdom. (11)



अर्जुन उवाच ।



परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान् ।

पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम् ॥ १२ ॥





Arjuna said:



Thou art the supreme Eternal, the supreme Abode, the supreme Purity, eternal divine man, primeval Deity, unborn, the Lord! (12)



आहुस्त्वामृषयः सर्वे देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा । असितो देवलो व्यासः स्वयं चैव ब्रवीषि मे ॥ १३ ॥





All the Rishis have thus acclaimed Thee, as also the divine Rishi, Nârada; so Asita, Devala, and Vyâsa; and now Thou Thyself tellest it me. (13)



सर्वमेतदृतं मन्ये यन्मां वदसि केशव । न हि ते भगवन्व्यक्तिं विदुर्देवा न दानवाः ॥ १४ ॥





All this I believe true that Thou sayest to me, O Keshava. Thy manifestation, O Blessed Lord, neither Shining Ones nor Dânavas[6] comprehend. (14)



स्वयमेवात्मनाऽऽत्मानं वेत्थ त्वं पुरुषोत्तम । भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेव जगत्पते ॥ १५ ॥





Thyself indeed knowest Thyself by Thyself, O Purushottama; Source of beings, Lord of beings, Shining One of Shining Ones, Ruler of the world! (15)



वक्तुमर्हस्यशेषेण दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः । याभिर्विभूतिभिर्लोकानिमांस्त्वं व्याप्य तिष्ठसि ॥ १६ ॥





Deign to tell without reserve of Thine own divine glories, by which glories Thou remainest, pervading these worlds. (16)



कथं विद्यामहं योगिंस्त्वां सदा परिचिन्तयन् । केषु केषु च भावेषु चिन्त्योऽसि भगवन्मया ॥ १७ ॥





How may I know thee, O Yogi, by constant meditation? In what, in what aspects art Thou to be thought of by me, O blessed Lord? (17)



विस्तरेणात्मनो योगं विभूतिं च जनार्दन । भूयः कथय तृप्तिर्हि शृण्वतो नास्ति मेऽमृतम् ॥ १८ ॥





In detail tell me again of Thy yoga and glory, O Janardana; for me there is never satiety in hearing thy life-giving words. (18)



श्रीभगवानुवाच ।



हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः ।

प्राधान्यतः कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे ॥ १९ ॥





The Blessed Lord said:



Blessed be thou! I will declare to thee My divine glory by its chief characteristics, O best of the Kurus; there is no end to details of Me. (19)



अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सर्वभूताशयस्थितः । अहमादिश्च मध्यं च भूतानामन्त एव च ॥ २० ॥





I, O Gudakesha, am the Self, seated in the heart of all beings; I am the beginning, the middle, and also the end of all beings. (20)



आदित्यानामहं विष्णुर्ज्योतिषां रविरंशुमान् । मरीचिर्मरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी ॥ २१ ॥





Of the Adityas I am Vishnu; of radiances the glorious sun; I am Marîchi of the Maruts; of the asterisms the Moon am I. (21)



वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासवः । इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना ॥ २२ ॥





Of the Vedas I am the Sâma-Veda; I am Vâsava of the Shining Ones; and of the senses I am the mind[7]; I am of living beings the intelligence[8]. (22)



रुद्राणां शङ्करश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम् । वसूनां पावकश्चास्मि मेरुः शिखरिणामहम् ॥ २३ ॥





And of the Rudras[9] Shañkara am I; Vittesha of the Yakshas and Râkshasas[10]; and of the Vasus[9] I am Pâvaka; Meru of high mountains am I. (23)



पुरोधसां च मुख्यं मां विद्धि पार्थ बृहस्पतिम् । सेनानीनामहं स्कन्दः सरसामस्मि सागरः ॥ २४ ॥





And know Me, O Pârtha, of household priests the chief, Brihaspati: of generals I am Skanda; of lakes I am the ocean. (24)



महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामस्म्येकमक्षरम् । यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालयः ॥ २५ ॥





Of the great Rishis Bhṛigu; of speech I am the one syllable[11]; of sacrifices I am the sacrifice of silent repetitions[12]; of immovable things the Himâlaya. (25)



अश्वत्थः सर्ववृक्षाणां देवर्षीणां च नारदः । गन्धर्वाणां चित्ररथः सिद्धानां कपिलो मुनिः ॥ २६ ॥





Asvattha of all tree; and of divine Rishis Nârada; of Gandharvas[13] Chitraratha; of the perfected the Muni Kapila. (26)



उच्चैःश्रवसमश्वानां विद्धि माममृतोद्भवम् । ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणां च नराधिपम् ॥ २७ ॥





Uchchaishravas of horses know me, nectar-born[14]; Airâvata of lordly elephants, and of men the Monarch. (27)



आयुधानामहं वज्रं धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक् । प्रजनश्चास्मि कन्दर्पः सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकिः ॥ २८ ॥





Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; of cows I am Kâmadhuk; I am Kandarpa of the progenitors; of serpents Vâsuki am I. (28)



अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम् । पितॄणामर्यमा चास्मि यमः संयमतामहम् ॥ २९ ॥





And I am Ananta of Nâgas[15], Varuna of sea-dwellers I; and of ancestors Aryaman; Yama of governors am I. (29)



प्रह्लादश्चास्मि दैत्यानां कालः कलयतामहम् । मृगाणां च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं वैनतेयश्च पक्षिणाम् ॥ ३० ॥





And I am Prahlâda of Daityas;[16] of calculators Time am I; and of wild beasts I the imperial beast;[17] and Vainateya of birds. (30)



पवनः पवतामस्मि रामः शस्त्रभृतामहम् । झषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामस्मि जाह्नवी ॥ ३१ ॥





Of purifiers I am the wind; Rama of warriors I; and I am Makara of fishes; of streams the Gangâ am I. ⁠



सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यं चैवाहमर्जुन । अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वादः प्रवदतामहम् ॥ ३२ ॥





Of creations the beginning and the ending, and also the middle am I, O Arjuna. Of sciences the science concerning the Self; the speech of orators I. (32)



अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि द्वन्द्वः सामासिकस्य च । अहमेवाक्षयः कालो धाताऽहं विश्वतोमुखः ॥ ३३ ॥





Of letters the letter A I am, and the duality of a compound[18]; I also everlasting Time; I the Supporter, whose face turns everywhere. (33)



मृत्युः सर्वहरश्चाहमुद्भवश्च भविष्यताम् । कीर्तिः श्रीर्वाक्च नारीणां स्मृतिर्मेधा धृतिः क्षमा ॥ ३४ ॥





And all-devouring Death am I, and the origin of all to come; and of feminine qualities, fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intelligence, constancy, forgiveness. (34)



बृहत्साम तथा साम्नां गायत्री छन्दसामहम् । मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहमृतूनां कुसुमाकरः ॥ ३५ ॥





Of hymns also Brihatsâman; Gâyatrî of metres am I; of months I am Mârgasîrsha; of seasons the flowery. (35)



द्यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् । जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्त्वं सत्त्ववतामहम् ॥ ३६ ॥





I am the gambling of the cheat, and the splendour of splendid things I; I am victory, I am determination, and the truth of the truthful I. (36)



वृष्णीनां वासुदेवोऽस्मि पाण्डवानां धनञ्जयः । मुनीनामप्यहं व्यासः कवीनामुशना कविः ॥ ३७ ॥





Of the Vṛishnis[19] Vâsudeva am I; of the Pândavas[19] Dhananjaya; of the Sages[20] also I am Vyâsa; of poets Ushanâ the Bard. (37)



दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम् । मौनं चैवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम् ॥ ३८ ॥





Of rulers I am the sceptre; of those that seek victory I am statesmanship; and of secrets I am also silence; the knowledge of knowers am I. (38)



यच्चापि सर्वभूतानां बीजं तदहमर्जुन । न तदस्ति विना यत्स्यान्मया भूतं चराचरम् ॥ ३९ ॥





And whatsoever is the seed of all beings, that am I, O Arjuna; nor is there aught, moving or unmoving, that may exist bereft of Me. (39)



नान्तोऽस्ति मम दिव्यानां विभूतीनां परन्तप । एष तूद्देशतः प्रोक्तो विभूतेर्विस्तरो मया ॥ ४० ॥





There is no end of My divine powers, O Parantapa. What has been declared is illustrative of My infinite glory. (40)



यद्यद्विभूतिमत्सत्त्वं श्रीमदूर्जितमेव वा । तत्तदेवावगच्छ त्वं मम तेजोंऽशसम्भवम् ॥ ४१ ॥





Whatsoever is glorious, good, beautiful, and mighty, understand thou that to go forth from a fragment of My splendour. (41)



अथवा बहुनैतेन किं ज्ञातेन तवार्जुन । विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत् ॥ ४२ ॥





But what is the knowledge of all these details to thee, O Arjuna? Having pervaded this whole universe with one fragment of Myself, I remain. (42)



इति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीता॰ विभूतियोगो नाम दशमोऽध्यायः ।





Thus in the glorious Upanishads of the Bhagavad-Gita, the science of the Eternal, the scripture of Yoga, the dialogue between Shri Krishna and Arjuna, the tenth discourse, entitled:



THE YOGA OF SOVEREIGNTY.





* * *





↑ A Rishi is a man who has completed his human evolution, but who remains in the super-physical regions in touch with the earth, in order to help humanity.

↑ Buddhi.

↑ The four Kumaras, or Virgin Youths, the highest in the occult Hierarchy of this earth.

↑ The heads and legislators of a race.

↑ Buddhi-Yoga.

↑ Demigods, in the Greek sense.

↑ Manah.

↑ Chetana.

↑ 9.09.1 Celestial beings.

↑ Semi-human beings.

↑ Om.

↑ Japa.

↑ Celestial Singers.

↑ Amrita, the nectar of immortality.

↑ Serpents, who were Teachers of Wisdom.

↑ Semi-human beings.

↑ Lion.

↑ Dvanda.

↑ 19.019.1 A family, or clan, among the Hindus.

↑ Munis.





* * *





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource[1]. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported[2] license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL[3].

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page[4].

The following users contributed to this book:

[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]



* * *



↑ https://en.wikisource.org

↑ https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0

↑ https://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.html

↑ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Wikisource:Scriptorium





